Add Connectors and ML updates for 2.9 (#4554)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _ml-commons-plugin/connectors.md

 "status": "CREATED"
}
```

## Configuration options

The following configuration options are **required** in order to create a connector:

| Field | Data type | Description |
| :---  | :--- | :--- |
| `name` | String | The name of the connector. |
| `description` | String | A description of the connector. |
| `version` | Integer | The version of the connector. |
| `protocol` | String | The protocol for the connection. For AWS services such as Amazon SageMaker and Amazon Bedrock, use `aws_sigv4`. For all other services, use `http`. |
| `parameter` | JSON array | The default connector parameters, including `endpoint` and `model`. 
| `credential` | String | Defines any credential variables required to connect to your chosen endpoint. ML Commons uses **AES/GCM/NoPadding** symmetric encryption with a key length of 32 bytes. When a connection cluster first starts, the key persists in OpenSearch. Therefore, you do not need to manually encrypt the key.
| `action` | JSON array | Tells the connector what actions to run after a connection to ML Commons has been established. For more information about how to configure actions, see [Actions](#action-settings).

> | `backend_roles` | String | A list of OpenSearch backend roles. For more information about setting up backend roles, see [Assigned backend roles to users]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/model-access-control#assigning-backend-roles-to-users).

Reviewer: Should it be "Assigning" instead of "Assigned" in the link?

Author: Yes.

---
layout: default
title: Connecting to other ML platforms
has_children: false
nav_order: 60
---

> # Connecting to other ML platforms

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Connecting to third-party ML platforms"? Otherwise, it's not clear what "other" refers to.

Author: ```suggestion
# Connecting to third-party ML platforms
```

> Machine Learning (ML) Connectors enables the ability to integrate OpenSearch's ML capabilities with third-party ML tools and platforms. Through connectors, OpenSearch can invoke these third-party endpoints to enrich query results and data pipelines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Machine Learning (ML) Connectors provides the ability to integrate OpenSearch ML capabilities with third-party ML tools and platforms. Through connectors, OpenSearch can invoke these third-party endpoints to enrich query results and data pipelines.
```

## Supported connectors

As of OpenSearch 2.9, connectors have been tested for the following ML tools, though its possible to make connectors for tools not listed:

> - [Amazon SageMaker](https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/) allows you to host and manage the life cycle of text embedding models on Amazon SageMaker, powering semantic search queries on OpenSearch. When connected, Amazon SageMaker hosts your models and OpenSearch is used to query inferences. This benefits Amazon SageMaker users who value it's functionality such as model monitoring, serverless hosting, and workflow automation for continuous training and deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Amazon SageMaker](https://aws.amazon.com/sagemaker/) allows you to host and manage the life cycle of text embedding models, powering semantic search queries in OpenSearch. When connected, Amazon SageMaker hosts your models and OpenSearch is used to query inferences. This benefits Amazon SageMaker users who value its functionality such as model monitoring, serverless hosting, and workflow automation for continuous training and deployment.
```

> - [Amazon Comprehend](https://aws.amazon.com/comprehend/) allows you to extract metadata automatically from OpenSearch ingest pipeline, enriching data indexed in OpneSearch and improving your search capabilities. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Amazon Comprehend](https://aws.amazon.com/comprehend/) allows you to extract metadata automatically from an OpenSearch ingest pipeline, enriching data indexed in OpenSearch and improving your search capabilities. 
```

> - [ChatGPT](https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt) enables you to run OpenSearch queries while invoking the ChatGPT API, helping you build on OpenSearch faster and improves the speed in which OpenSearch search functionality can retrieve data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ChatGPT](https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt) enables you to run OpenSearch queries while invoking the ChatGPT API, helping you build on OpenSearch faster and improves the data retrieval speed for OpenSearch search functionality.
```

> - [Amazon Bedrock](https://aws.amazon.com/bedrock/) is an alternative to ChatGPT inside a fully managed service.

Author: We're going be removing this line since we don't currently support Bedrock for 2.9.

> - [Amazon Bedrock](https://aws.amazon.com/bedrock/) is an alternative to ChatGPT inside a fully managed-service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Amazon Bedrock](https://aws.amazon.com/bedrock/) is an alternative to ChatGPT inside a fully managed service.
```

> - [NVIDIA Triton](https://developer.nvidia.com/triton-inference-server) allows you to host text embedding models on NVIDIA's high performance model serving technology. Power semantic search queries and vector generation ingest pipelines using [GPU-acceleration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/gpu-acceleration/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [NVIDIA Triton](https://developer.nvidia.com/triton-inference-server) allows you to host text embedding models on NVIDIA's high performance model-serving technology. Power semantic search queries and vector generation ingest pipelines using [GPU-acceleration]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/gpu-acceleration/).
```

- [Cohere](https://cohere.com/) allows you to use data from OpenSearch to power Cohere's large language models.

## Prerequisites

> If you are an admin deploying wanting to use an ML connector, make sure that target model of the connector has already been deployed on your chosen platform. Furthermore, make sure that you have access to send and receive data to the third-party API for your connector. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are an admin deploying an ML connector, make sure that target model of the connector has already been deployed on your chosen platform. Furthermore, make sure that you have permissions to send and receive data to the third-party API for your connector. 
```

When access control is enabled on your third-party platform, you can enter your security settings using the `authorization` or `credential` settings inside the connector API.

### Adding trusted endpoints

> To make sure that you configure connectors in OpenSearch, add the trusted endpoints into your cluster settings using the `plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex` setting, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure connectors in OpenSearch, add the trusted endpoints into your cluster settings using the `plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex` setting, as shown in the following example:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```json
````

PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex": [

>             "^https://runtime\\.sagemaker\\..*\\.amazonaws\\.com/.*$",

Reviewer 2: So a forward slash does not need to be escaped with `\\`?

Author: @Zhangxunmt: Do we need to adjust this example in any way?

Reviewer 3: A forward slash doesn't need to be escaped in java regex, we don't need to adjust this example.

Reviewer 2: Thanks. I think we should specify that it's a Java regex that's used here because regex expressions can be of many flavors.

            "^https://api\\.openai\\.com/.*$",
            "^https://api\\.cohere\\.ai/.*$",
            "^https://bedrock\\..*\\.amazonaws.com/.*$"
        ]
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Enabling ML nodes

> Connectors require the use of dedicated ML nodes. To make sure you have ML nodes enabled, update the following cluster settings:

Reviewer 3: In fact, either local model or remote inference can support non-ml serving, one can specify `plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node` to false and then models can be running on data nodes.

Author: But if we're using a connector it won't be running a local model, correct? I suppose you could run remote inference through SageMaker?

Author: I added this line, "If you are running a remote inference or local model, you can set `"plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node"` to `false` and use data nodes instead."

> Connectors also require the use of dedicated ML nodes. To make sure you have ML nodes enabled, update the following cluster settings:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Connectors require the use of dedicated ML nodes. To make sure you have ML nodes enabled, update the following cluster settings:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```json
````

PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node": true,

>         "plugins.ml_commons.native_memory_threshold": 100

Reviewer 3: Native memory threshold doesn't have impact on remote inference, it's not a necessary to explicitly specify this, and setting this value to 100 can affect circuit breaker logic for local model, it's not a recommendation to  set this to 100.

Author: I'll go ahead and remove this line from the example.

    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Setting up connector access control

> To enable access control on the connector API, use the following cluster setting. When enabled, the `authorization` or `credential` options will be required in order to use the connector API.

Author: ```suggestion
To enable access control on the connector API, use the following cluster setting:
```

```
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {

>         "plugins.ml_commons.connector_access_control_enabled": false

Author: ```suggestion
        "plugins.ml_commons.connector_access_control_enabled": true
```

> To enable access control on the connector API, use the following cluster setting. When enabled, the `authorization` or `credential` options will be required in order to use the connector API.

Reviewer 2: I would introduce the request with the first sentence only (with a colon at the end). I would move the "when enabled" sentence to after the request.

    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> If successful, OpenSearch returns the following response:

Author: ```suggestion
When enabled, the `authorization` or `credential` options will be required in order to use the connector API. If successful, OpenSearch returns the following response:
```

> When enabled, the `authorization` or `credential` options will be required in order to use the connector API. If successful, OpenSearch returns the following response:

Reviewer 3: Same as above, when this is enabled, it's not `authorization` or `credential` required, in fact, it's `backend_roles` or `add_all_backend_roles` or `access_model` is required when creating the connector.

```
{
  "acknowledged": true,
  "persistent": {
    "plugins": {
      "ml_commons": {

>         "connector_access_control_enabled": "true"

Reviewer 3: The example result is `true` but above request is `false`, seems not consistent.

      }
    }
  },
  "transient": {}
}
```

## Creating a connector

> The connector create API, `/_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create`, creates connections to third-party ML tools. Using the `endpoint` parameter, you can connect to any supported ML tool using their specific API endpoint. For example, to connect to a ChatGPT completion model, you can connect using the `api.openai.com` as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The connector create API operation, `/_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create`, creates connections to third-party ML tools. Using the `endpoint` parameter, you can connect to any supported ML tool using their specific API endpoint. For example, to connect to a ChatGPT completion model, you can connect using the `api.openai.com` as shown in the following example:
```

            "url": "https://${parameters.endpoint}/v1/completions",
            "headers": {
                "Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.openAI_key}"
            },
            "request_body": "{ \"model\": \"${parameters.model}\", \"prompt\": \"${parameters.prompt}\", \"max_tokens\": ${parameters.max_tokens}, \"temperature\": ${parameters.temperature} }"
        }
    ],
    "access_mode": "public"
}
```

If successful, the connector API responds with a `connector_id` and `status` for the connection.

```
{
 "connector_id": "M2pBmYgB5cK1H70wk3hd",
 "status": "CREATED"
}
```

## Configuration options

The following configuration options are **required** in order to build a connector:

| Field | Data type | Description |
| :---  | :--- | :--- |
| `name` | String | The name of the connector. |
| `description` | String | The description for the connector. |
| `version` | Integer | The version for the connector. |
| `protocol` | String | The protocol for the connection. For AWS services such as SageMaker and Bedrock, use `aws_sigv4`. For all other services, use `http`. |
| `parameter` | JSON array | The default connector parameters, including `endpoint` and `model`. 

> | `credential` | String | Defines any credential variables required connect to your chosen endpoint. ML Commons uses **AES/GCM/NoPadding** symmetric encryption with a key length of 32 bytes. When a connection cluster first starts, the key persists inside of OpenSearch. Therefore, you do not need to manually encrypt the key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `credential` | String | Defines any credential variables required connect to your chosen endpoint. ML Commons uses **AES/GCM/NoPadding** symmetric encryption with a key length of 32 bytes. When a connection cluster first starts, the key persists in OpenSearch. Therefore, you do not need to manually encrypt the key.
```

| `action` | JSON array | Tells the connector what actions to run after a connection to ML Commons has been made. For more information about how to configure actions, see [Actions](#action-settings).

> 

Reviewer 3: Missing several connector access control related fields: `backend_roles`, a list including OpenSearch backend roles; `access_mode`, public/restricted/private, if not explicitly passing, default value is private; `add_all_backend_roles`, true/false, admin user can not specify this to true, backend_roles of this connector will be set to creator's backend roles list if creator is not admin user.

### Action settings

The `action` setting when creating a connection tells the connector what ML Commons API operation to run against the connection endpoint. You can configure actions using the following settings:

| Field | Data type | Description |
| :---  | :--- | :--- |
`action_type` | String | Required. Sets the ML Commons API operation to use upon connection. As of OpenSearch 2.9, only `predict` is supported. 
`method` | String | Required. Defines the HTTP method for the API call. Supports `POST` and `GET`.

> `url` | String | Required. Sets the connection endpoint the action takes place. This must match the regex expression for the connection using when [adding trusted endpoints](#adding-trusted-endpoints).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`url` | String | Required. Sets the connection endpoint where the action takes place. This must match the regex expression for the connection used when [adding trusted endpoints](#adding-trusted-endpoints).
```

`headers` | Sets the headers used inside the request or response body. Default is `application/json`.
`request_body` | Required. Sets the parameters contained inside the request body of the action.

## Registering and deploying a connected model

> After a connection has been created, use the `connector_id` from the response to register and deploy a connected models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a connection has been created, use the `connector_id` from the response to register and deploy a connected model.
```

> For registering model, you have the following options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To register a model, you have the following options:
```

> - You can use `model_group_id` to create the model with an associated model group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You can use `model_group_id` to register a model version to an existing model group.
```

> - If you do not use `model_group_id`, a new model is created.

Reviewer 2: Link to the model access control documentation here for more information (_ml-commons-plugin/model-access-control.md).

> - If you do not use `model_group_id`, a new model is created.

Author: ```suggestion
- If you do not use `model_group_id`, ML Commons creates a model with a new model group.
```

The following example registers a model named `openAI-GPT-3.5 completions`:

```
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/_register
{
    "name": "openAI-GPT-3.5 completions",
    "function_name": "remote",
    "model_group_id": "lEFGL4kB4ubqQRzegPo2",
    "description": "test model",
    "connector_id": "kUFFL4kB4ubqQRzeQ_r-"
}
```

> ML Commons returns the `task_id` and registration status of the model. You can use the `task_id` to find the `model_id`, as showing the following example:

Author: ```suggestion
ML Commons returns the `task_id` and registration status of the model. You can use the `task_id` to find the `model_id`, as shown the following example:
```

**GET model request**

```
GET /_plugins/_ml/tasks/l0FIL4kB4ubqQRzeKvpV

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please make sure to use json for all requests and add copy buttons where needed.

Author: Do have a distinction with the copy button between illustrative examples that are meant to guide the user but not be used directly, like this one or most example responses, and examples that are meant to be copied and replaced with a user's custom values?

Reviewer 2: Copy buttons copy all text. Users can replace what needs to be replaced directly but there is no functionality for such replacement through the UI

**GET model response**

```
{
  "model_id": "mUFIL4kB4ubqQRzeKvr1",
  "task_type": "REGISTER_MODEL",
  "function_name": "REMOTE",
  "state": "COMPLETED",
  "worker_node": [
    "Zx5D5SeOS_-EAteyzBpTYg"
  ],
  "create_time": 1688715405818,
  "last_update_time": 1688715406198,
  "is_async": false
}
```

> Lastly, use the `model_id` to deploy the model, as showing in the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lastly, use the `model_id` to deploy the model:
```

  ],
  "create_time": 1688715508466,
  "last_update_time": 1688715508692,
  "is_async": true
}
```

After a successful deployment, you can test the model using the Predict API set in the connector's `action` settings, as shown in the following example:

```
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/mUFIL4kB4ubqQRzeKvr1/_predict
{
    "parameters": {
        "prompt": "Say this is a test"
    }
}
```

The Predict API returns inference results for the connected model, as shown in the following example response:

```
{
  "inference_results": [
    {
      "output": [
        {
          "name": "response",
          "dataAsMap": {
            "id": "cmpl-7ZaMR9V34zIIaYDyNNMpaS5KolU0X",
            "object": "text_completion",
            "created": 1688715607,
            "model": "text-davinci-003",
            "choices": [
              {
                "text": """

This is indeed a test""",
                "index": 0,
                "finish_reason": "length"
              }
            ],
            "usage": {
              "prompt_tokens": 5,
              "completion_tokens": 7,
              "total_tokens": 12
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

## Examples 

> The following examples connector calls show how to create a connector with supported third-party tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example connector calls show how to create a connector with supported third-party tools.
```

### Cohere

> The following example request creates a standalone Cohere connection:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example request creates a standalone Cohere connector:
```

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create
{
    "name": "Cohere Connector: embedding",
    "description": "The connector to cohere embedding model",
    "version": 1,
    "protocol": "http",
    "credential": {
        "cohere_key": "..."
    },
    "actions": [
        {
            "action_type": "predict",
            "method": "POST",
            "url": "https://api.cohere.ai/v1/embed",
            "headers": {
                "Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.cohere_key}"
            },
            "request_body": "{ \"texts\": ${parameters.prompt}, \"truncate\": \"END\" }"
        }
    ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ### AWS

Reviewer: Should this heading be a bit more descriptive?

The following example creates a SageMaker connector:

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```json
```

> The following example creates a SageMaker connector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates an Amazon SageMaker connector:
```

POST /_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create
{
    "name": "sagemaker: embedding",
    "description": "Test connector for Sagemaker embedding model",
    "version": 1,
    "protocol": "aws_sigv4",
    "credential": {
        "access_key": "...",
        "secret_key": "...",
        "session_token": "..."
    },
    "parameters": {
        "region": "us-west-2",
        "service_name": "sagemaker"
    },
    "actions": [
        {
            "action_type": "predict",
            "method": "POST",
            "headers": {
                "content-type": "application/json"
            },
            "url": "https://runtime.sagemaker.${parameters.region}.amazonaws.com/endpoints/lmi-model-2023-06-24-01-35-32-275/invocations",
            "request_body": "[\"${parameters.inputs}\"]"
        }
    ]
}
```

> The `credential` parameter contains the following options reserved for `aws-sigv4` authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `credential` parameter contains the following options reserved for `aws-sigv4` authentication:
```

- `access_key`: Required. Provides the access key for the AWS instance.
- `secret_key`: Required. Provides the secret key for the AWS instance.
- `session_token`: Optional. Provides a temporary set of credentials for the AWS instance.

> The `paramaters` section requires the following options when using `aws-sigv4` authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `paramaters` section requires the following options when using `aws-sigv4` authentication:
```

> - `region`: The region of the AWS instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `region`: The AWS Region in which the AWS instance is located.
```

> - `region`: The region of the AWS instance.

Reviewer: Confirm that this change retains the intended meaning.

- `service_name`: The name of the AWS service for the connector.

## Next steps

> - To learn more about using models in OpneSearch, see [ML Framework]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/ml-framework/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To learn more about using models in OpenSearch, see [ML Framework]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/ml-framework/).
```

> - To learn more about model access control and groups, see [Model access control]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/model-access-control/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To learn more about model access control and model groups, see [Model access control]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/model-access-control/).
```

            "^https://api\\.cohere\\.ai/.*$",
            "^https://bedrock\\..*\\.amazonaws.com/.*$"
        ]
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Enabling ML nodes

Connectors also require the use of dedicated ML nodes. To make sure you have ML nodes enabled, update the following cluster settings:

```
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node": true,
        "plugins.ml_commons.native_memory_threshold": 100
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Setting up connector access control

To enable access control on the connector API, use the following cluster setting. When enabled, the `authorization` or `credential` options will be required in order to use the connector API.

```
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.connector_access_control_enabled": false
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

If successful, OpenSearch returns the following response:

```
{
  "acknowledged": true,
  "persistent": {
    "plugins": {
      "ml_commons": {
        "connector_access_control_enabled": "true"
      }
    }
  },
  "transient": {}
}
```

## Creating a connector

> The connector create API, `/_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create`, creates connections to third-party ML tools. Using the `endpoint` parameter, you can connect to any supported ML tool using their specific API endpoint. For example, to connect to a ChatGPT completetion model, you can connect using the `api.openai.com` as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 4: Should we add more rules and guidances on how to write a connector template, so user can follow the rules and create connectors with more flexibility?

Author: Its more an example than anything. The configuration options and examples help with flexibility and customization when building a connector.

That being said, is there a better example we should use?

            "url": "https://${parameters.endpoint}/v1/completions",
            "headers": {
                "Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.openAI_key}"
            },
            "request_body": "{ \"model\": \"${parameters.model}\", \"prompt\": \"${parameters.prompt}\", \"max_tokens\": ${parameters.max_tokens}, \"temperature\": ${parameters.temperature} }"
        }
    ],
    "access_mode": "public"
}
```

If successful, the connector API responds with a `connector_id` and `status` for the connection.

```
{
 "connector_id": "M2pBmYgB5cK1H70wk3hd",
 "status": "CREATED"
}
```

## Configuration options

The following configuration options are **required** in order to build a connector:

| Field | Data type | Description |
| :---  | :--- | :--- |
| `name` | String | The name of the connector. |
| `description` | String | The description for the connector. |
| `version` | Integer | The version for the connector. |
| `protocol` | String | The protocol for the connection. For AWS services such as SageMaker and Bedrock, use `aws_sigv4`. For all other services, use `http`. |
| `parameter` | JSON array | The default connector parameters, including `endpoint` and `model`. 

> The following configuration are **optional**:

Reviewer 4: Actually credentials and action are not optional. All connectors would need credentials and the "predict" action is required to map to the "Predict" API in ml-commons. Can we update this part?

Author: Sure.

`headers` | Sets the headers used inside the request or response body. Default is `application/json`.
`request_body` | Required. Sets the parameters contained inside the request body of the action.

## Registering and deploying a connected model

After a connection has been created, use the `connector_id` from the response to register and deploy a connected models.

For registering model, you have the following options:

- You can use `model_group_id` to create the model with an associated model group.
- If you do not use `model_group_id`, a new model is created.

The following example registers a model named `openAI-GPT-3.5 completions`:

```
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/_register
{
    "name": "openAI-GPT-3.5 completions",
    "function_name": "remote",
    "model_group_id": "lEFGL4kB4ubqQRzegPo2",
    "description": "test model",
    "connector_id": "kUFFL4kB4ubqQRzeQ_r-"
}
```

ML commons returns the `task_id` and registration status of the model. You can use the `task_id` to find the `model_id`, as showing the following example:

> **GET model request**

Author: Its on line 193

### Enabling ML nodes

Most connectors require the use of dedicated ML nodes. To make sure you have ML nodes enabled, update the following cluster settings:

```json
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node": true,
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

If you are running a remote inference or local model, you can set `"plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node"` to `false` and use data nodes instead.

### Setting up connector access control

To enable access control on the connector API, use the following cluster setting:

```json
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.connector_access_control_enabled": true
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

When enabled, the `backend_roles`, `add_all_backend_roles`, or `access_model` options are required in order to use the connector API. If successful, OpenSearch returns the following response:

```json
{
  "acknowledged": true,
  "persistent": {
    "plugins": {
      "ml_commons": {
        "connector_access_control_enabled": "true"
      }
    }
  },
  "transient": {}
}
```

## Creating a connector

You can build connectors in two ways:

> - A **standalone connector**, saved in a connector index, which can be reused and shared with multiple remote models but requires access to both the model and the third-part being accessed by the connector, such as OpenAI.

Reviewer: I would number these as opposed to using bullets.

> - A **standalone connector**, saved in a connector index, which can be reused and shared with multiple remote models but requires access to both the model and the third-part being accessed by the connector, such as OpenAI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A **standalone connector**, saved in a connector index, can be reused and shared with multiple remote models but requires access to both the model and the third party being accessed by the connector, such as OpenAI.
```

> - An **internal connector**, saved in the model index and which can only be used with one remote model. Unlike a standalone connect, users only need access to the model itself to access the connector, since the connection is made inside the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An **internal connector**, saved in the model index, can only be used with one remote model. Unlike a standalone connector, users only need access to the model itself to access an internal connector because the connection is established inside the model.
```

## Configuration options

> The following configuration options are **required** in order to create a connector. These settings can be used in both standalone and internal connectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following configuration options are **required** in order to create a connector. These settings can be used for both standalone and internal connectors.
```

> ---

Reviewer 5: We should add some security warning for remote connector. As user need to configure credential in connector, for example AWS credential, openAI API key, user should always use security enabled cluster. Otherwise their credentials will not be protected which is risky.

- [ChatGPT](https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt) enables you to run OpenSearch queries while invoking the ChatGPT API, helping you build on OpenSearch faster and improving the data retrieval speed for OpenSearch search functionality.

Additional connectors will be added to this page as they are tested and verified. 

## Prerequisites

If you are an admin deploying an ML connector, make sure that the target model of the connector has already been deployed on your chosen platform. Furthermore, make sure that you have permissions to send and receive data to the third-party API for your connector. 

When access control is enabled on your third-party platform, you can enter your security settings using the `authorization` or `credential` settings inside the connector API.

### Adding trusted endpoints

> To configure connectors in OpenSearch, add the trusted endpoints to your cluster settings using the `plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex` setting, which supports Java regex expressions, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 5: Add this to settings page

```json
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.trusted_connector_endpoints_regex": [
            "^https://runtime\\.sagemaker\\..*\\.amazonaws\\.com/.*$",
            "^https://api\\.openai\\.com/.*$",
            "^https://api\\.cohere\\.ai/.*$",

>             "^https://bedrock\\..*\\.amazonaws.com/.*$"

Reviewer 5: remove this

        ]
    }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ### Enabling ML nodes

Reviewer 5: For remote connector, it consumes much less resource. So should be ok if user prefer to run on data node. If they don't have dedicate ML node, and prefer to run on data node, they can set 

```
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node": false
    }
}
```

> Most connectors require the use of dedicated ML nodes. To make sure you have ML nodes enabled, update the following cluster settings:

Reviewer 5: `Most connectors require the use of dedicated ML nodes` -> `By default, connectors require the use of dedicated ML nodes`

For remote connector, it consumes much less resource. So should be ok if user prefer to run on data node. If they don't have dedicate ML node, and prefer to run on data node, they can set 

```
PUT /_cluster/settings
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.only_run_on_ml_node": false
    }
}
```

      }
    }
  },
  "transient": {}
}
```

## Creating a connector

You can build connectors in two ways:

1. A **standalone connector**, saved in a connector index, can be reused and shared with multiple remote models but requires access to both the model and the third party being accessed by the connector, such as OpenAI.

2. An **internal connector**, saved in the model index, can only be used with one remote model. Unlike a standalone connector, users only need access to the model itself to access an internal connector because the connection is established inside the model.

## Configuration options

The following configuration options are **required** in order to create a connector. These settings can be used for both standalone and internal connectors.

| Field | Data type | Description |
| :---  | :--- | :--- |
| `name` | String | The name of the connector. |
| `description` | String | A description of the connector. |
| `version` | Integer | The version of the connector. |
| `protocol` | String | The protocol for the connection. For AWS services such as Amazon SageMaker and Amazon Bedrock, use `aws_sigv4`. For all other services, use `http`. |

> | `parameter` | JSON array | The default connector parameters, including `endpoint` and `model`. 

Reviewer 5: `parameter` -> `parameters`

Type is : Map<String, ?>

Reviewer 5: From security team , we should call out all parameters in this block will be overridable in predict request. User can provide parameter with same in predict request to override the default parameter value defined in connector.

> | `credential` | String | Defines any credential variables required to connect to your chosen endpoint. ML Commons uses **AES/GCM/NoPadding** symmetric encryption with a key length of 32 bytes. When a connection cluster first starts, the key persists in OpenSearch. Therefore, you do not need to manually encrypt the key.

Reviewer 5: Type: `Map<string, string>`

Reviewer 5: `ML Commons uses **AES/GCM/NoPadding** symmetric encryption with a key length of 32 bytes. When a connection cluster first starts, the key persists in OpenSearch. Therefore, you do not need to manually encrypt the key.`
-> 
`ML Commons uses **AES/GCM/NoPadding** symmetric encryption to encrypt your credential. When a connection cluster first starts, ml-commons will create a random 32 bytes key and persist in OpenSearch system index. Therefore, you do not need to manually set the encryption key.`

> | `action` | JSON array | Tells the connector what actions to run after a connection to ML Commons has been established.

Reviewer 5: `Tells the connector what actions to run after a connection to ML Commons has been established.`
-> 
`Define what actions can run within this connector.`

| `access_mode` | String | Sets the access mode for the model, either `public`, `restricted`, or `private`. Default is `private`. For more information about `access_mode`, see [Model groups]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/model-access-control#model-groups).
| `add_all_backend_roles` | Boolean | When set to `true`, adds all `backend_roles` to the access list, which only a user with admin permissions can adjust. When set to `false`, non-admins can add `backend_roles`.

When creating a connection, the `action` setting tells the connector what ML Commons API operation to run against the connection endpoint. You can configure actions using the following settings.

| Field | Data type | Description |
| :---  | :--- | :--- |
`action_type` | String | Required. Sets the ML Commons API operation to use upon connection. As of OpenSearch 2.9, only `predict` is supported. 
`method` | String | Required. Defines the HTTP method for the API call. Supports `POST` and `GET`.
`url` | String | Required. Sets the connection endpoint at which the action takes place. This must match the regex expression for the connection used when [adding trusted endpoints](#adding-trusted-endpoints).

> `headers` | String | Sets the headers used inside the request or response body. Default is `application/json`.

Reviewer 5: Type: `Map<String, String>`

Reviewer 5: `Default is `application/json`, -> `Default "Content-Type" is "application/json"`

`request_body` | String | Required. Sets the parameters contained inside the request body of the action.

### Standalone connector

> The connector creation API, `/_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create`, creates connections to third-party ML tools. Using the `endpoint` parameter, you can connect ML Commons to any supported ML tool using its specific API endpoint. For example, to connect to a ChatGPT completion model, you can connect using the `api.openai.com`, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer 5: `For example, to connect to a ChatGPT completion model,`

-> 

`For example, to connect to a ChatGPT chat model,`

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create
{
    "name": "OpenAI Chat Connector",
    "description": "The connector to public OpenAI model service for GPT 3.5",
    "version": 1,
    "protocol": "http",
    "parameters": {
        "endpoint": "api.openai.com",
        "model": "gpt-3.5-turbo"
    },
    "credential": {
        "openAI_key": "..."
    },
    "actions": [
        {
            "action_type": "predict",
            "method": "POST",
            "url": "https://${parameters.endpoint}/v1/chat/completions",
            "headers": {
                "Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.openAI_key}"
            },
            "request_body": "{ \"model\": \"${parameters.model}\", \"messages\": ${parameters.messages} }"
        }
    ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> If successful, the connector API responds with a `connector_id` and `status` for the connection:

Reviewer 5: Remove "and `status`"

```json
{
  "connector_id": "a1eMb4kBJ1eYAeTMAljY"
}
```

After a connection has been created, use the `connector_id` from the response to register and deploy a connected model.

To register a model, you have the following options:

- You can use `model_group_id` to register a model version to an existing model group.
- If you do not use `model_group_id`, ML Commons creates a model with a new model group.

> The following example registers a model named `openAI-GPT-3.5 completions`:

Reviewer 5: > The following example registers a model named `openAI-GPT-3.5 completions`:

-> 

> The following example registers a model named `openAI-gpt-3.5-turbo`:

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/_register
{
    "name": "openAI-gpt-3.5-turbo",
    "function_name": "remote",

>     "model_group_id": "wlcnb4kBJ1eYAeTMHlV6",

Reviewer 5: Suggest add the example for creating this model group 
```
POST /_plugins/_ml/model_groups/_register
{
  "name": "remote_model_group",
  "description": "This is an example description"
}

Sample response
{
  "model_group_id": "wlcnb4kBJ1eYAeTMHlV6",
  "status": "CREATED"
}
```

  "function_name": "REMOTE",
  "state": "COMPLETED",
  "worker_node": [
    "XPcXLV7RQoi5m8NI_jEOVQ"
  ],
  "create_time": 1689793598499,
  "last_update_time": 1689793598530,
  "is_async": false
}
```

Lastly, use the `model_id` to deploy the model:

**Deploy model request**

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/cleMb4kBJ1eYAeTMFFg4/_deploy
```

**Deploy model response**

```json
{
  "task_id": "vVePb4kBJ1eYAeTM7ljG",
  "status": "CREATED"
}
```

Use the `task_id` from the deploy model response to make sure the model deployment completes:

**Verify deploy completion request**

```json
GET /_plugins/_ml/tasks/vVePb4kBJ1eYAeTM7ljG
```

**Verify deploy completion response**

```
{
  "model_id": "cleMb4kBJ1eYAeTMFFg4",
  "task_type": "DEPLOY_MODEL",
  "function_name": "REMOTE",
  "state": "COMPLETED",
  "worker_node": [
    "n-72khvBTBi3bnIIR8FTTw"
  ],
  "create_time": 1689793851077,
  "last_update_time": 1689793851101,
  "is_async": true
}
```

After a successful deployment, you can test the model using the Predict API set in the connector's `action` settings, as shown in the following example:

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/cleMb4kBJ1eYAeTMFFg4/_predict
{
  "parameters": {

>     "model": "gpt-3.5-turbo",

Reviewer 5: We can remove this line, as model already defined in connector

      },
      {
        "role": "user",
        "content": "Hello!"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The Predict API returns inference results for the connected model, as shown in the following example response:

```json
{
  "inference_results": [
    {
      "output": [
        {
          "name": "response",
          "dataAsMap": {
            "id": "chatcmpl-7e6s5DYEutmM677UZokF9eH40dIY7",
            "object": "chat.completion",
            "created": 1689793889,
            "model": "gpt-3.5-turbo-0613",
            "choices": [
              {
                "index": 0,
                "message": {
                  "role": "assistant",
                  "content": "Hello! How can I assist you today?"
                },
                "finish_reason": "stop"
              }
            ],
            "usage": {
              "prompt_tokens": 19,
              "completion_tokens": 9,
              "total_tokens": 28
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

### Internal connector

To create an internal connector, add the `connector` parameter to the Register model API, as shown in the following example:

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/models/_register

> {

Reviewer 5: This is not chat model example. Let's keep consistent with the standalone connector.

            }
        ]
    }
}
```

## Examples 

The following example connector requests show how to create a connector with supported third-party tools.

### OpenAI chat connector

The following example creates a standalone OpenAI chat connector. The same options can be used for an internal connector under the `connector` parameter:

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create
{
    "name": "OpenAI Chat Connector",
    "description": "The connector to public OpenAI model service for GPT 3.5",
    "version": 1,
    "protocol": "http",
    "parameters": {
        "endpoint": "api.openai.com",
        "model": "gpt-3.5-turbo"
    },
    "credential": {
        "openAI_key": "..."
    },
    "actions": [
        {
            "action_type": "predict",
            "method": "POST",
            "url": "https://${parameters.endpoint}/v1/chat/completions",
            "headers": {
                "Authorization": "Bearer ${credential.openAI_key}"
            },
            "request_body": "{ \"model\": \"${parameters.model}\", \"messages\": ${parameters.messages} }"
        }
    ]
}
```

> After creating the connector, you can retrieve the `task_id`, deploy the model, and use the Predict API, similar to a standalone connector.

Reviewer 5: > After creating the connector, you can retrieve the `task_id`, deploy the model, and use the Predict API, similar to a standalone connector.

-> 

After creating the connector, you can use the connector id to register model, deploy and predict.

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/connectors/_create
{
    "name": "sagemaker: embedding",
    "description": "Test connector for Sagemaker embedding model",
    "version": 1,
    "protocol": "aws_sigv4",
    "credential": {
        "access_key": "...",
        "secret_key": "...",
        "session_token": "..."
    },
    "parameters": {
        "region": "us-west-2",
        "service_name": "sagemaker"
    },
    "actions": [
        {
            "action_type": "predict",
            "method": "POST",
            "headers": {
                "content-type": "application/json"
            },
            "url": "https://runtime.sagemaker.${parameters.region}.amazonaws.com/endpoints/lmi-model-2023-06-24-01-35-32-275/invocations",
            "request_body": "[\"${parameters.inputs}\"]"
        }
    ]
}
```

The `credential` parameter contains the following options reserved for `aws-sigv4` authentication:

- `access_key`: Required. Provides the access key for the AWS instance.
- `secret_key`: Required. Provides the secret key for the AWS instance.
- `session_token`: Optional. Provides a temporary set of credentials for the AWS instance.

> The `paramaters` section requires the following options when using `aws-sigv4` authentication:

Reviewer 5: `aws-sigv4`

-> 

`aws_sigv4`

- `region`: The AWS Region in which the AWS instance is located.

> - `service_name`: The name of the AWS service for the connector.

Reviewer 5: As all items defined in `parameters` will be overridable and visible (user can see parameters with get connector API). If user don't want this, they can move these two reserved parameters for `aws_sigv4` to `credential`.
